RECOGNITION OF CALLITE1CHE SPP. IN BRITAIN
By J. P. Savidge
Little difficulty should be experienced in the identification of
the British species of CaUitriche, providing the specimens are
flowering and /or fruiting, although in a few cases the use of a
microscope may be necessary to confirm correct determination.
The main purpose of this short synopsis is to indicate the most
satisfactory characters by which each species can be recognized.
C. hermaphroditica L. (<7. autumnalis L.) and C. truncata Guss.
are very distinct from the other British species of CaUitriche in
that their leaves are without stomata and pellucid glands, their
flowers are without bracts, and they have a basic chromosome
number oi x = 3 instead of x = 5. They have only linear leaves,
which are usually less than 17 mm. long, and grow completely
submerged. It is usually easy to separate the two by their fruits,
that of C. truncata being distinctly broader than long with rounded
mericarps, whereas the fruit of C. hermaphroditica is as broad as
long and distinctly winged. C. truncata usually has shorter (less
than 10 mm. long) pale green leaves as against the somewhat
broader, darker leaves of C. hermaphroditica. The latter species
is northern in its distribution, whereas C. truncata is a southern
species.    Only in the Midlands are the two likely to be found
growing together, although as yet they have not been recorded
in the same locality.
C. hamulata Kiitz. is readily distinguished by the possession
of 12- and 16-celled pellucid glands as against the 4- or 8-celled
glands found in the remaining species. Its fruit is small, usually
black when mature, about as long as broad, with the reflexed
styles closely adpressed to the lateral sides. The stamens are
usually less than 2 mm. long and the anthers are creamy-white.
In fast-flowing or deep water the linear leaves are characterized by
their 'calliper'-shaped tips, the tips of the emarginate apex first
curving outwards and then finally converging. However, in some
habitats the submerged leaves have simple emarginate apices.
C. obtusangula Le Gall is a lowland species and can often be
recognized by its many leaved rosettes with the rhomboidspathulate leaves tending to push the apex above the level of the
water. Good diagnostic characters are the pollen grains, many of
which are at least twice as long as broad; the large cream coloured
anthers on filaments 5 to 9 mm. long; and the longer than broad
fruit with rounded mericarps and more or less persistent long
(4 to 8 mm.) styles. The bracts in this species are often conspicuous, being up to 1-5 mm. long and persistent.
The two species which are most likely to cause trouble in
identification are C. stagnalis Scop, and C. platycarpa Kiitz., and
extra care should always be taken to avoid misidentification. If
possible, one should use a combination of characters rather than
relying on just one character.   The main differences are:
C. platycarpa is widespread, but is confined to land below about
500 ft., whereas C. stagnalis is common, especially on mud and in
shallow water, up to 3,000 ft. When submerged, C. stagnalis
retains its ovate leaves; but C. platycarpa produces linear 1-veined
leaves up to 30 mm. long when in fast-flowing or deep still water.
C, platycarpa rarely produces abundant fruit and some colonies
seem to be virtually sterile. This is in marked contrast to C.
stagnalis which is usually very fertile, except when growing submerged.
Hybrids are very rare, although at least four of the species
may be found growing together. So far, I have not come across
any authentic British material of C. palustris L., but I have
seen herbarium sheets which suggest that C. polymorpha L0nnr.
may occur in the British Isles. I should be very pleased to hear
from anyone who finds C. platycarpa-hke plants with fruit
obviously broader than long and less than 1 mm. in length.
Key to species of Callitriche occurring in Britain
1     Flowers without bracts; leaves without pellucid glands and
stomata; plants completely submerged with linear leaves less
than 17 mm. long and 2 mm. wide ..............................    2
Flowers with two bracts (in hamulata and stagnalis these may
be inconspicuous as they are less than 0*5 mm. long); leaves
with pellucid glands and usually with stomata; plants submerged or terrestrial, if submerged then leaves usually more
than 17 mm. long and / or 2 mm. wide...........................    3
2     Fruit distinctly broader than long, 0*9-1*2 x 11-1-5 mm., the
mericarps with rounded outer margins; leaves light green,
5-10 (-13) mm. long, with more or less parallel sides . truncata
Fruit about as broad as long, 1*2-2-7 x 1*2-2-7 mm., the mericarps distinctly winged in lake forms, but only keeled in canal
forms; leaves dark green, (5-) 7-17 (-20) mm., becoming
slightly broader towards the base ............ hermaphroditica
3     Fruit distinctly longer than broad, 1-3-1-8 x 1-1-1-4 mm.,
broadest at the middle, the mericarps with rounded outer
margins; about 70% of pollen at least twice as long as broad;
anthers pale cream, about 1*7 mm. wide ......... obtusangida
Fruits not distinctly longer than broad; no pollen twice as
long as broad; mericarps with winged or keeled outer margins ; anthers less than 1*5 mm. wide ...........................    4
4    Styles closely reflexed to lateral sides of fruit, more or less
persistent; stamens up to 2 mm. long, anthers pale cream to
white; mature fruit usually black (brown in var.
pedunculata),   slightly  broader  than  long,   0-8-1-3 x 0*8-1-3
mm., the mericarps with keeled outer margins ...... hamidata
Styles not usually closely reflexed to lateral sides of fruit;
mature fruit brown; stamens usually more than 2 mm. long;
anthers dark cream or yellow ....................................    5
5    Outer margins of mericarps distinctly winged; caespitose and
terrestrial forms with stamens 2-3 mm. long, leaves about
twice as long as broad; submerged plants never with linear
leaves; all forms with leaves possessing at least three veins;
usually very fertile .......................................... stagnalis
Outer margins of mericarps keeled; stamens normally longer
than 3 mm., even in terrestrial forms; leaves usually at least
three times as long as broad and up to 30 mm. long, and 1veined, in submerged forms; plants rarely producing abundant fruit and usually about 15% of pollen in viable ............